[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
Hello there, OddLotss listeners. You are
about to listen to a very special
episode. This is a conversation recorded
live at our recent event in New York.
That's right. We had a live OddLotss
event on June 26th. We had tons of
conversations. We're going to be rolling
them out in the uh days ahead. But the
first one we want to bring you was our
headliner for the night, uh Jim Chenos.
That's right. The famed shortseller. He
was there giving us all his thoughts on
the market right now. So, take a listen.
All right. First question. Are Bitcoin
Treasury companies the stupidest thing
you've ever seen in your entire life?
[Applause]
You know, it's rarely rarely that I have
to increase my personal security after a
podcast, which I had to do after your
our last podcast together when I uh sent
some inmperate things about Bitcoin
Treasury companies.
Look, I mean, look, here's the thing. I
I get people very agitated about this
and and they get they they point out on
just what a genius idea this is and I
keep trying to point out to them I'm
doing the same thing that guys like
Michael Sailor are doing. I'm on the
same side of the trade. And I keep
pointing out to my critics, you're on
the opposite side of that trade. And you
don't want to be on the opposite side of
the trade. And the Bitcoin Treasury
paradox being that you are the one
buying the pieces of paper that have
infinite supply so that Michael Sailor
and I can buy the digital asset with the
limited supply. And it makes kind of no
sense. So what will inevitably happen is
happening in that is there's nothing
proprietary here. This is just simply
raising capital to buy a financial asset
and other companies will do this. And in
fact even since the podcast we last did
I think the the number of companies that
have announced this strategy is you know
scores more. I think there's over a
hundred in the US and over 200 globally
now. So who's actually buying Micro
Strategy? cuz you know I thought
everybody on my timeline. Okay. But I
thought once the spot ETFs, the spot
bitcoin ETFs came out like this business
model would go away and it hasn't. No.
And because there's there's a wonderful
sales job that's being done about the
fact that this is an economic engine in
and of itself. And so therefore terms
like Bitcoin yield are are used and and
I've called them financial gibberish
because they are. and and in fact this
will get arbed away ultimately by
companies that will do this uh to try to
capture that spread. In the case of
Micro Strategy, it's substantial. It's
still
$50 billion something like that of the
difference between the value of the
enterprise value of the company and the
value of their Bitcoin holdings. But the
thing that really kind of shot me into
orbit on all this was when
Sailor and others then said,"Well, no,
you can't really value us on an NAV
basis, a so-called MNAV multiple of NAV.
You actually have to also give us
additional value for the amount of
profit that we make every quarter from
the appreciation in the asset."
I said I just pointed out I said, "Well,
that's like saying, you know, my whole
net worth is in a house that's worth
$400,000 that that is now worth $500,000
a year or two later. And my net worth is
not $500,000 now. It's $2.5 million
because it's the value of the house plus
a multiple on the increase in the
profitability of the asset." When you
put it that way, it sounds a little
absurd. It is absurd.
There's like 200 of them now, right? I
It's over 200 globally. Yeah, that's
that's uh Wait, I have one more
question. Why did Micro I have to
remember to call them strategy, but I
can't bring myself to do it. Um why did
they switch from issuing the convertible
debt to preferred shares? Because he
realized that as he began to issue more
and more common, it was putting pressure
on the premium. So now the latest
iteration is well we're going to do this
quasi equity security quasi debt
preferred stock and uh then we can
torque up we can lever up the the
balance sheet. Now, this is a company
whose selling point a year ago was we're
not going to lever because we have this
wonderful equity that we can issue at a
premium. And now they're saying, well,
you know, if maybe if it trades above
2x, we'll issue equity, but if it's
between one and 2x, we'll do preferred.
And then if it's below one times, we'll
buy back common. And then what is
chainos going to do? To which I said,
well, I'll be out of the trade by then.
You know, if it's a one times NAV, it's
not a trade. So that's kind of the the
latest game plan, but stay tuned. It'll
change. I think the narrative keeps
changing. The other one is of course
that Micro Strategy will be put in the
S&P 500 and so that will be untold
riches for everyone that doesn't know
that's going to happen. Um, we got to
move off this topic because I just find
it so depressing. You know, like I read
the news and they're like, oh, like, you
know, some big breakthrough with
batteries in China is happening or
whatever and then the big
entrepreneurial innovation in the United
States is the 200th company that's
borrowing money. Like, it's too bleak
when you really think about it's too
bleak to contemplate.
[Applause]
So, on Tuesday or Wednesday morning,
shares in real estate companies fell
after victory. What's your take on uh
New York City real estate these days?
Well, I I I guess I'm glad I sold my
apartment last year. Um but but uh look,
I I think a lot of people are surprised.
Clearly, New York City real estate and
commercial real estate will be
challenged if a lot of things happen
that the current front runner, you know,
wants to happen. I think there's a lot
of restrictions that will be put in
front of making some of that stuff
happen. But my friends in New York City
commercial real estate have said really
the regulatory framework and the
legislative framework in New York and
New York City has done nothing but get
worse over the last 15 years. And I'm
kind of stunned that that some of the
publicly traded um companies like
Vornnado and SL Green still have the cap
rates as low as they do. I mean SLG we
looked at yesterday and its cap rate is
still 5.2%.
You're short SLG now. We've been we've
been short SLG on and off for for a
number of years and we are again. Um and
I just I don't get the riskreward on on
a 5.2% cap rate on New York City
commercial real estate right now. I
think it should be seven or eight.
Right. You can get four and a half% by
buying a treasury. Right. Exactly. Yeah.
And so if you're buying it at 52, you're
And that that's read accounting. Read
accounting is also pretty pretty
squirly, by the way, for a lot of
reasons. you know, they don't include
overhead in the cap rate. And of course,
there is real depreciation in some of
this stuff. There's maintenance capex in
New York City. It's pretty high. And
that doesn't include any capex. So, I
don't get it. I don't see rents going up
here. I guess it would be the easiest
way. And that'd be the only reason you'd
be buying office buildings at a five
cap. What about residential? Yeah. I
mean, you know, it's weird. I mean, your
audience knows better than I do. I mean,
it's it's it's problematic in so many
ways. U there's not enough supply.
There's all kinds of weird regulations.
Things are expensive. And you can kind
of see why M Dami's message resonated
with a lot of people. A lot of it has to
do with the cost of living here. Have
you been on the receiving end or I guess
dialing of any of the calls to gather
capital for a uh a challenger? Um well,
I'm I'm not a New Yorker anymore, but
the answer is yeah, but receiving or
calling? Receiving. I'm not calling. Um,
but uh yeah, sure. And uh who who are
they saying? Who who I'm not I'm not
going to get into that. Those are
private conversations. I think I think
they're all pretty pretty silly at this
point. Yeah, it was a good try, Joe.
Yeah, I try. Okay. Well, since we
mentioned the word bleak a couple times
um in these conversations now, is it
bleak being a short seller in the
current market?
Well, it's not a lot of fun. Um, but it
it's never really been fun. I mean, I I
started my original fund back in ' 85.
The Dow was at 1300. So, it's it's
pretty much and you know, we started
hedging back in 96.
So, you know, it's it's it's always a
slug. It's never easy. It's why a lot of
people don't do it. On the other hand,
the idiosyncratic opportunities, most
things fail as you know and the
idiosyncratic opportunities have
probably never been greater given the
market we have now and with things like
Bitcoin treasury companies and all kinds
of other things. They just are sort of
headscratchers and are a function of
general animal spirits. So, there's a
lot to do and I I think that's the fun
part of what I do is there's a lot to do
and seemingly more every year, but some
of the stuff going on right now is a bit
of a headscratcher and we don't try to
predict where the market's going, but
the animal spirits are definitely back.
You know, it's like several years ago or
2021, people could have blamed ZER. It's
like, oh, it's cuz the rates are at zero
and that's why everyone's going crazy.
And I do think it's really interesting
how much speculative activity has
persisted and the ZERP excuse does not
hold water anymore. So we got to find uh
we got to find something new. Speaking
of idiosyncratic opportunities, one
thing you've been talking about a lot
and multiple times on the show is um the
data center reach and Equinex I think
just had two terrible days in a row.
What's going on with them? So these are
the companies that have clouds but
they're not like the hyperscalers like
what's their So I I think the legacy
data centers and there's only a couple
companies out in the United States that
that really have legacy data centers.
There's Equinex, there's Digital Realy,
and then there's a sort of the old
Colony Capital is now called Digital
Bridge, and they own these things sort
of in fund format. And when we took a
look at this with our our partner back
in 22, the idea was pretty simple and
and we did not see the AI explosion in
in mid22, but the idea was it was a
pretty crummy business then working on
the cloud and SAS demand. uh but it
became a really bad business with the
advent of AI because it just moved the
hyperscalers to invest more in
state-of-the-art data centers and these
are older data centers that were short
and the idea being that that the new GPU
centric data centers need liquid cooling
they basically need all the
infrastructure ripped out and replaced
and the business was not a high return
on capital business before this it's
getting even worse now and what Equinex
said uh yesterday at their analyst day
was that revenues were not going to
quite be what people thought they would
be, but more ominously capex was going
to keep increasing. And that's what
we've been saying that that these are
not like warehouses where you just kind
of collect a check. These are actually
operating businesses where you have to
service the the the servers. You have to
make sure there's redundancy. It's just
it's a business, a tech business. and um
they're traded as REITs and that was
kind of the opportunity that was the the
sort of dichotomy in valuation. So
people added back the depreciation as
they do with REITs and they valued them
on a so-called FFO or AFO which is a
cash flow metric but in fact unlike
warehouses shopping centers to lesser
extent office buildings the capex was
real depreciation was a real expense. So
to give you an example with Equinex
yesterday, they said our capex is now
going to bump up to between four and
five billion a year. The problem is
their EBIT DA this year is expected to
be 4.5 billion. So all of that's going
to go to capex, meaning they're going to
have to basically borrow or issue equity
to pay their interest in dividends. And
that's just a definition of a bad
business. And it's a business that's not
growing very fast. So unlike other
really true AI companies which are
growing 25 30 40% a year, these guys are
growing 3% 5% 6% sort of with GDP. So
there's no growing their way out of
this. Um and and so they're just really
bad businesses trading at at just
nosebleleed valuations.
[Music]
On the topic of idiosyncratic
opportunities, I got to ask about
Carvana cuz when my husband and I moved
back to the States in 2022,
we bought a used car through Carvana and
that was a mistake cuz it took us about
6 months to actually get the car and
they lost lost all our paperwork and it
was just an absolute nightmare. And I
thought at the time, this is a company
whose entire business model is basically
built on regulation, right? Like that's
what they're doing. And I thought,
they're not going to have a future if
they are this bad at it. And yet the
stock is up. It's done insanely well.
Yeah. Well, it's it's it's done it's
done a double round trip, right? It it
it crashed 99% and now it's up 100x. So
um it's pretty interesting again and and
the reason it's interesting is that if
you go through the numbers they are
making more than 100% of their pre-tax
profit from gain on sale of loans
subprime loans and gain on sale of
equity stakes in other companies. And
you x those two out they're losing money
and they're losing money now right after
the rebound after the restructuring from
2022 2023.
And this is a company that is being
valued again as a secular growth stock
that saw its used car revenues drop 30%
between 2022 and 2023.
So it's not necessarily a secular growth
company. The accounting is abysmal. And
then what people are really missing is
that what's happening in subprime auto
uh securizations right now and you can
track it on your Bloomberg terminal. Um
delinquencies are starting to skyrocket.
Yeah, we actually did an episode on this
recently with Jim Egan. Yeah. And so
again, a huge amount of their profits
comes from selling, you know, generating
paper from customers and then selling it
into the open market or to affiliates.
And this is a company that is was spun
out of a company called Drive Time
Finance, which is their affiliated
finance company, which was originally
called Ugly Duckling in the late 90s,
which was run by the current CEO's
father. And that company collapsed in
the first subprime blowup, which was not
the GFC. It was actually in the late 90s
in subprime auto credit and and consumer
loans. And um it didn't go bankrupt, but
it came close. And he had to restructure
it. He bought it bought it in private
and then restructured it, renamed it
drive time Finance. But that's the
genesis of Carvana. That's its DNA. It's
basically a subprime finance, you know,
lead company. if you will. And those
companies should not trade at 40 and 50
times um expected earnings and they
don't by and large. They're consumer
finance companies. So, it's a it's a
it's a odd bird. It's still heavily
leveraged. The stock is up a ton. But
what really got us interested again
recently was the vast amount of insider
selling that has just started in May and
June in the company. If you go look at
the insider selling in the company, it
is just now a torrent of everybody
selling like pretty much every day. And
uh I we just don't think that's a good
sign given what's happening in the
subprime securization market. One area
of the financial ecosystem that you've
been cynical about it uh cynical about
for a long time is sort of private
equity and a lot of the private assets.
And something that um I've been talking
to some people about is or and that you
hear people talk about is not so much
necessarily that the values have gone
down though probably many cases that
they have but that it's been a long time
since LPS etc have gotten distributions
etc whether it's venture at the venture
level the PE level how long can that go
on where it's like people are not
getting cash out yeah so um before it
becomes a real problem so I really kind
of got much more interested in this
area, serving on on a couple of big
investment committees in Manhattan and
one of which had a really really huge
slug of our assets of this uh of this
nonprofit in privates in private equity
for the most part, a little bit of
venture, a little bit of real estate.
And what always struck me was was that
we we spent a lot of time talking about
the market, talking about our managers,
talking about why hedge funds were
terrible. And then we'd get to the part
about private and they say, "Well, the
returns are lagged by a quarter, so you
know, here they are and let's move on."
And I started looking at the numbers and
this was a this is a fund that that had
all the the the premier firms, the ones
you all know. and
gee stock market's doing awfully well
and we're kind of doing 10% 11% in terms
of realized returns and then uh
estimated IRR which is problematic for
reasons a lot of your audience knows and
um is it just me or are we not
understanding we're leverage long equity
in these entities and yet we're
underperforming the indices
That was five, six years ago. And I
think that that's only gotten worse
since. And so I'm really beginning to
wonder private equity was considered a
panacea for nonprofits and and
foundations, endowments, because
basically, as my friend Cliff A said, it
was volatility, you know, laundering, if
you will, because no one ever showed you
a big down quarter. But now we're
getting to the point where a lot of
these funds are really mature and the
actual returns themselves are not going
to be mid- teens with low volatility.
They're going to be high single digits,
low double digits. And we can look at
the S&P and say, okay, you know, I'm I'm
doing better in that and I I'm liquid
and I'm not paying fees. And so I
suspect that private equity and
ultimately private credit are going to
be where hedge funds found themselves 10
to 15 years ago having to justify their
existence after having a pretty good run
from the late 90s to to the GFC. I
suspect that's where we are in private
equity. It'll still be a very lucrative
business, but I just think its golden
days are are over where it was just a
free lunch of mid- teen returns with no
volatility. Does anyone ever ask you
what you're bullish on? Should I ask?
I look I we're we're long equities,
right? We're long stuff. A lot of people
in the audience are long. Give us an
example. Well, I mean, we're long
indices, so we're long general corporate
America. I just, you know, I just hate
this stuff. I'm short.
I thought you weren't supposed to get
emotional about investing every once in
a while. So yeah, it's uh and there's
one other thing though I I do want to
mention and that is I was talking to
someone earlier today and I think one of
the things that's underappreciated by
investors right now and and one of the
things that's been most interesting to
me is how corporate profit margins have
have held up which used to be very mean
reverting as you know and um the more
work we've done on this the more we're
kind of convinced that the capital
spending boom we're seeing due to tech
and and specifically AI is is looking
very much akin to the global internet
buildout, networking buildout in the
late 90s. And the problem there of
course is is that
if you buy my chips from Nvidia or you
were buying my networking equipment at
Cisco and Lucent, that's revenue for me
and profit, but for you it's capitalized
expense, right? It's written off over
time and that has a big big boost until
people pull their orders and that's what
we saw in 2001 2002 that GDP dropped
about 1 to 2% in the recession of 0102.
Does anybody know what corporate profits
did in that and that was an investment
driven recession. Consumers didn't feel
it at all. earnings were down about 45%
I think from peak to trough in the S&P
they were down about the same a little
bit more in the global financial crisis
but of course GDP collapsed so here's a
little interesting thought experiment
right now um Nvidia's
uh revenues are about 1 half of 1% of US
GDP about $140 billion and our GDP is
about 29 trillion okay anyone Tell me
what Cisco and Lucent, the two companies
that you needed when building out your
internet network in 99200. Did anybody
know what their combined revenues as a
percent of GDP was in 2000?
No using your phones and Chad GP. It was
a half a percent. It was uh it was
roughly $50 billion total on GDP of 10
trillion.
So those revenues stopped growing at at
at some point shortly thereafter and
actually shrunk a little bit. So the
investment boom we're seeing right now
we've seen before and it's not just
chips, right? It's Caterpillar. It's
people building the data centers. It's
it's people building new utilities. I
mean it's there is a ecosystem around
the AI uh boom that is considerable as
there was for TMT back in 99 and 2000
but it is a riskier revenue stream
because if people pull back they can
pull back capex very easily. projects
can get put on hold for six months or
nine months and and that immediately
shows up in disappointing revenues and
earnings forecast if it happens. We're
not there yet, but that's one of the
risks out there that I think a lot of
people are underestimating. So, one of
the reasons that um we like talking to
you and a consistent thing that I've
noticed in the almost 10 years of doing
this podcast, it's always uh you learn a
lot talking to people who are really
steeped in accounting and that people
who uh are knowledgeable about
accounting just I don't know they seem
to be have more interesting things to
say than a lot of other people. Will AI
be able to do accounting some of these
sort of understandings of you know
whatever capitalized expenses and
different like is this coming for the
accounting profession about coming for
the accounting profession that's a good
question I think that AI that that we've
seen and used is getting better and
better pulling numbers together and
making sense of them it's not quite
there yet when I've done it I find lots
and lots of errors not so much in the
numbers themselves but the implications
of the numbers the AI is still not
getting that great but it's going to I
think ultimately and the question will
be for sort of tonight's conversation
and keeping in the theme is
where we made a lot of money on the
short side idiosyncratically after
dotcom from sort of 03 to09 were in
analog businesses that saw their
business digitize.
So if you were selling an analog product
that that became digital you were in a
lot of trouble. think like Kodak, okay,
or Blockbuster, Yellow Pages, those
kinds of businesses, right? That
suddenly just didn't have to exist. And
there's going to be a raft of them post
AI and people are already kind of
starting to think that through. But
there will be industries that are
collecting what I call agency rents that
will suddenly not be able to collect
those agency rents. And um we're trying
to keep an eye on that. But I do think
that that the issue isn't so much the
quantitative numbers that AI will be
able to generate and give you ratios and
things like that, although Bloomberg
does a pretty good job of that already,
right? I mean, databases. Um, but
interpreting it and we're not there yet
in terms of understanding
what an increase in receivables are.
It's three times revenues or in increase
in cost of goods sold relative to
inventory. But it'll get there. it'll
get there within the next couple years.
So, one of the things I always wanted to
ask you was how you think about, I
guess, the time frames of some of your
short bets because it seems to me like,
you know, we can sit here and talk about
how crazy cap rates are for office
buildings in New York and subprime loans
and Carvana and how stupid Bitcoin
treasury companies are. Declining car
sales at Tesla. That's right. And yet,
you know, it the key to all of this, to
making the money on it, is actually
calling what the catalyst is going to be
and when the stock eventually falls.
Yeah. I I've after 40 years, I've kind
of figured out that the catalysts are
really evident pretty much in hindsight.
Um
that that if if the catalysts were that
obvious, it would be priced into the
stock. And so, you can look for
signposts along the world, but but
they're just that. Now, there's some
that are better than others. you know, a
massive increase in insider selling and
executives leaving has always been a
good one for the most part. It's it's
probabilistic, but I think that timing
is, you know, I always like say, you
know, only short the stocks that go
down. If they don't go down, don't short
them. Um, and and it's hard. And it's
why being hedged pretty much
systematically to us made a lot of sense
for the last 30 years. um and say,
"Okay, we're going to take the market
out of what we're doing and we're going
to just try to isolate the the
idiosyncratic attributes of our shorts."
And even then, I mean, stuff you would
think would bring a lower valuation out
of common sense, you know, doesn't
happen in in a bullion bull markets and
in fact can be a negative factor. You
know, the worse the company, the the
more it goes up. So, you have to be
willing to understand that concept as
well. But again, it's it's it's funny,
you know, Equinex coming out of the
blue, just to use the example we've had
tonight and stock down 20% in two days.
I mean, everything it said at analyst
day was known to anybody was paying
attention, but yet they came out and
said it and everybody went, "Oh, wow.
Ouch." Speaking of executive departures,
I think there was another one today at
Tesla, someone who was like, I think
pretty close to Elon or someone who had
been there for a long time. Do you have
a um Nobody cares. Nobody cares. Do Do
you have a Tesla thought of the day?
Nobody cares. That's my thought. Nobody
cares. Yeah. You You could, you know,
you could see Elon, you know, robbing a
Brinks truck with a mask on, whatever.
Oh, that's Elon. You know,
I'm sure they're going to have a new
business of robbing Brinks trucks and,
you know, we'll put a we'll put a
trillion valuation on. I I've given up
trying to figure out what people think
about about executive departures at that
company. I mean their car sales are
plummeting, their cash flow is
plummeting, you know, all the metrics
that you would look as security
analysts, but it's a unique animal where
people will say, "Oh, well, of course,
yes, but you know, Rosie the robot's
going to serve me my breakfast and it's
going to have Tesla trademark on it, so
you know, it's worth a trillion
dollars." So there's always one stock in
every bull market that has that at least
that impremature of right of of a I call
it a hopes and dreams. Everyone can can
really project their hopes and dreams
onto that company and then value it any
way they want. And Cisco was that that
company by the way in 99. And it's it's
undoubtedly Tesla. Yeah. because
companies that are actually executing in
some of these, you know, fantastic areas
of the future like Nvidia and others
trade at a discount to Tesla and they're
actually doing things. You know, he's
just talking about doing things, but it
it doesn't matter, at least not yet. To
get to your timing question, Jim Chanos,
thank you so much. Always a thrill to
chat with you.
Thanks, guys. Thank you.
[Music]
This has been another episode of the
OddLotss podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway. And I'm
Jill Weisenthal. You can follow me at
the stalwart. Follow our guest Jim
Chenos. He's at real Jimchenos. Follow
our producers Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen
Arman Dashel Bennett at Dashbot and
Kaleb Brooks at Kalebrooks. For more
OddLots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlotss
where we have our daily newsletter and
all of our episodes. And you can chat
about these topics 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlots.
And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when we talk to uh veteran investors
like Jim Chenos, then please leave us a
positive review on your favorite podcast
platform. And remember, if you are a
Bloomberg subscriber, you can listen to
all of our episodes absolutely adree.
All you need to do is find the Bloomberg
channel on Apple Podcasts and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.